
SCIENCE50
Chlamydomonas, Paramoecium and bacteria.
These  organisms  are  called  unicellular
organisms (uni = single). On the other hand,
many  cells  group  together  in  a  single  body
and assume different functions in it to form
various body parts in multicellular organisms
(multi  =  many)  such  as  some  fungi,  plants
and animals. Can we find out names of some
more unicellular organisms?
Every  multi-cellular  organism  has  come
from  a  single  cell.  How?  Cells  divide  to
produce cells of their own kind. All cells thus
come from pre-existing cells.
Activity ______________ 5.2
• We  can  try  preparing  temporary
mounts  of  leaf  peels,  tip  of  roots  of
onion or even peels of onions of different
sizes.
• After performing the above activity, let
us see what the answers to the following
questions would be:
(a) Do  all  cells  look  alike  in  terms  of
shape and size?
(b) Do all cells look alike in structure?
(c) Could  we  find  differences  among
cells  from  different  parts  of  a
plant  body?
(d) What  similarities  could  we  find?
Some  organisms  can  also  have  cells  of
different kinds. Look at the following picture.
It depicts some cells from the human body.
Sperm
Bone
cell
Smooth
muscle
cell
Blood
cells
Ovum
Fig. 5.3: Various cells from the human body
More to  know
We can try preparing temporary mounts
of peels of onions of different sizes. What do
we observe? Do we see similar structures or
different structures?
What are these structures?
These structures look similar to each other.
Together  they  form  a  big  structure  like  an
onion  bulb!  We  find  from  this  activity  that
onion  bulbs  of  different  sizes  have  similar
small structures visible under a microscope.
The  cells  of  the  onion  peel  will  all  look  the
same, regardless of the size of the onion they
came from.
These  small  structures  that  we  see  are
the  basic  building  units  of  the  onion  bulb.
These  structures  are  called  cells.  Not  only
onions,  but  all  organisms  that  we  observe
around are made up of cells. However, there
are also single cells that live on their own.
Cells  were  first  discovered  by
Robert Hooke  in 1665. He observed
the cells in a cork slice with the help
of a primitive microscope.
Leeuwenhoek  (1674),  with  the
improved microscope, discovered the
free living cells in pond water for the
first  time.    It  was  Robert  Brown  in
1831 who discovered the nucleus in
the cell.  Purkinje in 1839 coined the
term  ‘protoplasm’  for  the  fluid
substance of the cell. The cell theory,
that  all  the  plants  and  animals  are
composed of cells and that the cell is
the basic unit of life, was presented
by  two  biologists,  Schleiden  (1838)
and  Schwann (1839). The cell theory
was  further  expanded  by  Virchow
(1855)  by  suggesting  that  all  cells
arise  from pre-existing cells.  With the
discovery  of  the  electron  microscope
in 1940, it was possible to observe and
understand the complex structure of
the cell and its various organelles.
The invention of magnifying lenses led to
the discovery of the microscopic world. It is
now known that a single cell may constitute
a whole organism as in Amoeba,
Nerve Cell
Fat cellRationalised 2023-24
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 51
The shape and size of cells are related to
the specific function they perform. Some cells
like Amoeba have changing shapes. In some
cases  the  cell  shape  could  be  more  or  less
fixed and peculiar for a particular type of cell;
for example, nerve cells have a typical shape.
Each  living  cell  has  the  capacity  to
perform  certain  basic  functions  that  are
characteristic of all living forms. How does
a living cell perform these basic functions?
We know that there is a division of labour in
multicellular  organisms  such  as  human
beings.  This  means  that  different  parts  of
the human body perform different functions.
The human body has a heart to pump blood,
a stomach to digest food and so on. Similarly,
division of labour is also seen within a single
cell. In fact, each such cell has got certain
specific components within it known as cell
organelles.  Each  kind  of  cell  organelle
performs a special function, such as making
new  material  in  the  cell,  clearing  up  the
waste  material  from  the  cell  and  so  on.  A
cell  is  able  to  live  and  perform  all  its
functions because of these organelles. These
organelles together constitute the basic unit
called the cell. It is interesting that all cells
are  found  to  have  the  same  organelles,  no
matter  what  their  function  is  or  what
organism they are found in.
uestions
1. Who discovered cells, and how?
2. Why  is  the  cell  called  the
structural and functional unit of
life?
5.2 What is a Cell Made Up of?
What is the Structural
Organisation of a Cell?
We  saw  above  that  the  cell  has  special
components called organelles. How is a cell
organised?
If we study a cell under a microscope, we
would come across three features in almost
every  cell;  plasma  membrane,  nucleus  and
cytoplasm.  All  activities  inside  the  cell  and
interactions of the cell with its environment
are possible due to these features. Let us see
how.
5.2.1 PL A S M A  M E M B R A N E  O R  C E L L 
MEMBRANE
This is the outermost covering of the cell that
separates  the  contents  of  the  cell  from  its
external environment. The plasma membrane
allows or permits the entry and exit of some
materials  in  and  out  of  the  cell.  It  also
prevents movement of some other materials.
The  cell  membrane,  therefore,  is  called  a
selectively permeable membrane.
How  does  the  movement  of  substances
take place into the cell? How do substances
move out of the cell?
Some substances like carbon dioxide or
oxygen can move across the cell membrane
by a process called diffusion. We have studied
the process of diffusion in earlier chapters.
We saw that there is spontaneous movement
of  a  substance  from  a  region  of  high
concentration to a region where its
concentration is low.
Something similar to this happens in cells
when, for example, some substance like CO2
(which  is  cellular  waste  and  requires  to  be
excreted out by the cell) accumulates in high
concentrations  inside  the  cell.  In  the  cell’s
external  environment,  the  concentration  of
CO2  is  low  as  compared  to  that  inside  the
cell.  As  soon  as  there  is  a  difference  of
concentration of CO2 inside and outside a cell,
CO2  moves  out  of  the  cell,  from  a  region  of
high  concentration,  to  a  region  of  low
concentration outside the cell by the process
of  diffusion.  Similarly,  O2  enters  the  cell  by
the  process  of  diffusion  when  the  level  or
concentration of O2 inside the cell decreases.
Thus,  diffusion  plays  an  important  role  in
gaseous exchange between the cells as well
as the cell and its external environment.
Water also obeys the law of diffusion. The
movement of water molecules through such a
selectively permeable membrane is called osmosis.
QRationalised 2023-24
SCIENCE52
The  movement  of  water  across  the  plasma
membrane is also affected by the
amount of substance dissolved in water. Thus,
osmosis is the net diffusion of water across a
selectively  permeable  membrane  toward  a
higher solute concentration.
What will happen if we put an animal cell
or a plant cell into a solution of sugar or salt
in water?
One  of  the  following  three  things  could
happen:
1. If the medium surrounding the cell has
a higher water concentration than the
cell, meaning that the outside solution
is very dilute, the cell will gain water by
osmosis. Such a solution is known as
a hypotonic solution.
Water  molecules  are  free  to  pass
across  the  cell  membrane  in  both
directions,  but  more  water  will  come
into  the  cell  than  will  leave.  The  net
(overall) result is that water enters the
cell. The cell is likely to swell up.
2. If  the  medium  has  exactly  the  same
water concentration as the cell, there
will be no net movement of water across
the cell membrane. Such a solution is
known as an isotonic solution.
Water crosses the cell membrane in
both directions, but the amount going
in is the same as the amount going out,
so  there  is  no  overall  movement  of
water. The cell will stay the same size.
3. If the medium has a lower
concentration  of  water  than  the  cell,
meaning that it is a very concentrated
solution,  the  cell  will  lose  water  by
osmosis. Such a solution is known as
a hypertonic solution.
Again,  water  crosses  the  cell
membrane in both directions, but this
time  more  water  leaves  the  cell  than
enters it. Therefore the cell will shrink.
Thus, osmosis is a special case of diffusion
through a selectively permeable membrane.
Now let us try out the following activity:
Activity ______________ 5.3
Osmosis  with  an  egg
(a) Remove the shell of an egg by dissolving
it in dilute hydrochloric acid. The shell
is  mostly  calcium  carbonate.  A  thin
outer  skin  now  encloses  the  egg.  Put
the egg in pure water and observe after
5 minutes. What do we observe?
The  egg  swells  because  water  passes
into it by osmosis.
(b) Place  a  similar  de-shelled  egg  in  a
concentrated salt solution and observe
for 5 minutes. The egg shrinks. Why?
Water  passes  out  of  the  egg  solution
into the salt solution because the salt
solution is more concentrated.
We can also try a similar activity with dried
raisins or apricots.
Activity ______________ 5.4
• Put  dried  raisins  or  apricots  in  plain
water  and  leave  them  for  some  time.
Then  place  them  into  a  concentrated
solution  of  sugar  or  salt.  You  will
observe  the  following:
(a) Each  gains  water  and  swells
when  placed  in  water.
(b) However,  when  placed  in  the
concentrated  solution  it  loses
water, and consequently shrinks.
Unicellular  freshwater  organisms  and
most plant cells tend to gain water through
osmosis. Absorption of water by plant roots
is also an example of osmosis.
Thus, diffusion is important in exhange
of  gases  and  water  in  the  life  of  a  cell.  In
additions  to  this,  the  cell  also  obtains
nutrition  from  its  environment.  Different
molecules  move  in  and  out  of  the  cell
through  a  type  of  transport  requiring  use
of energy.
The plasma membrane is flexible and is
made  up  of  organic  molecules  called  lipids
and  proteins.  However,  we  can  observe  the
structure  of  the  plasma  membrane  only
through an electron microscope.
The flexibility of the cell membrane also
enables the cell to engulf in food and other
material from its external environment. Such
processes are known as endocytosis. Amoeba
acquires its food through such processes.Rationalised 2023-24
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 53
Activity ______________ 5.5
• Find  out  about  electron  microscopes
from resources in the school library or
through  the  internet.  Discuss  it  with
your teacher.
uestions
1. How do substances like CO2 and
water move in and out of the cell?
Discuss.
2. Why  is  the  plasma  membrane
called  a  selectively  permeable
membrane?
5.2.2 CELL WALL
Plant  cells,  in  addition  to  the  plasma
membrane, have another rigid outer covering
called the cell wall. The cell wall lies outside
the plasma membrane. The plant cell wall is
mainly composed of cellulose. Cellulose is a
complex substance and provides structural
strength to plants.
When  a  living  plant  cell  loses  water
through  osmosis  there  is  shrinkage  or
contraction of the contents of the cell away
from the cell wall. This phenomenon is known
as  plasmolysis.  We  can  observe  this
phenomenon  by  performing  the  following
activity:
Activity ______________ 5.6
• Mount the peel of a Rhoeo leaf in water
on  a  slide  and  examine  cells  under
the high power of a microscope. Note
the  small  green  granules,  called
chloroplasts.  They  contain  a  green
substance  called  chlorophyll.  Put  a
strong solution of sugar or salt on the
mounted  leaf  on  the  slide.  Wait  for  a
minute and observe under a
microscope. What do we see?
• Now place some Rhoeo leaves in boiling
water for a few minutes. This kills the
cells. Then mount one leaf on a slide
and observe it under a microscope. Put
a  strong  solution  of  sugar  or  salt  on
the mounted leaf on the slide. Wait for
a  minute  and  observe  it  again.  What
do we find? Did plasmolysis occur now?
What  do  we  infer  from  this  activity?  It
appears that only living cells, and not dead
cells, are able to absorb water by osmosis.
Cell walls permit the cells of plants, fungi
and  bacteria  to  withstand  very  dilute
(hypotonic) external media without bursting.
In such media the cells tend to take up water
by  osmosis.  The  cell  swells,  building  up
pressure against the cell wall. The wall exerts
an  equal  pressure  against  the  swollen  cell.
Because  of  their  walls,  such  cells  can
withstand  much  greater  changes  in  the
surrounding medium than animal cells.
5.2.3 NUCLEUS
Remember the temporary mount of onion peel
we prepared? We had put iodine solution on
the peel. Why? What would we see if we tried
observing the peel without putting the iodine
solution? Try it and see what the difference
is. Further, when we put iodine solution on
the peel, did each cell get evenly coloured?
According to their chemical composition
different  regions  of  cells  get  coloured
differentially.  Some  regions  appear  darker
than other regions. Apart from iodine solution
we  could  also  use  safranin  solution  or
methylene blue solution to stain the cells.
We have observed cells from an onion; let
us now observe cells from our own body.
Activity ______________ 5.7
• Let us take a glass slide with a drop of
water on it. Using an ice-cream spoon
gently scrape the inside surface of the
cheek. Does any material get stuck on
the  spoon?  With  the  help  of  a  needle
we  can  transfer  this  material  and
spread it evenly on the glass slide kept
ready for this. To colour the material
we  can  put  a  drop  of  methylene  blue
solution on it. Now the material is ready
for observation under microscope. Do
not forget to put a cover-slip on it!
• What  do  we  observe?  What  is  the
shape of the cells we see? Draw it on
the  observation  sheet.
QRationalised 2023-24
SCIENCE54
• Was there a darkly coloured, spherical
or  oval,  dot-like  structure  near  the
centre  of  each  cell?  This  structure  is
called  nucleus.  Were  there  similar
structures in onion peel cells?
The nucleus has a double layered covering
called  nuclear  membrane.  The  nuclear
membrane has pores which allow the transfer
of  material  from  inside  the  nucleus  to  its
outside, that is, to the cytoplasm (which we
will talk about in section 5.2.4).
The  nucleus  contains  chromosomes,
which  are  visible  as  rod-shaped  structures
only  when  the  cell  is  about  to  divide.
Chromosomes  contain  information  for
inheritance of characters from parents to next
generation  in  the  form  of  DNA  (Deoxyribo
Nucleic  Acid)  molecules.  Chromosomes  are
composed of DNA and protein. DNA molecules
contain  the  information  necessary  for
constructing and organising cells. Functional
segments of DNA are called genes. In a cell
which is not dividing, this DNA is present as
part  of  chromatin  material.  Chromatin
material is visible as entangled mass of thread
like structures. Whenever the cell is about to
divide, the chromatin material gets organised
into chromosomes.
The nucleus plays a central role in cellular
reproduction, the process by which a single
cell divides and forms two new cells. It also
plays  a  crucial  part,  along  with  the
environment, in determining the way the cell
will develop and what form it will exhibit at
maturity, by directing the chemical activities
of the cell.
In  some  organisms  like  bacteria,  the
nuclear  region  of  the  cell  may  be  poorly
defined  due  to  the  absence  of  a  nuclear
membrane. Such an undefined nuclear region
containing  only  nucleic  acids  is  called  a
nucleoid. Such organisms, whose cells lack
a nuclear membrane, are called prokaryotes
(Pro = primitive or primary; karyote ≈ karyon
=  nucleus).  Organisms  with  cells  having  a
nuclear membrane are called eukaryotes.
Prokaryotic  cells  (see  Fig.  5.4)  also  lack
most  of  the  other  cytoplasmic  organelles
present  in  eukaryotic  cells.  Many  of  the
functions  of  such  organelles  are  also
performed  by  poorly  organised  parts  of  the
cytoplasm (see section 5.2.4). The chlorophyll
in  photosynthetic  prokaryotic  bacteria  is
associated  with  membranous  vesicles  (bag
like  structures)  but  not  with  plastids  as  in
eukaryotic cells (see section 5.2.5).
RibosomesPlasma
membrane
Cell wall
Nucleoid
Fig. 5.4: Prokaryotic cell
5.2.4 CYTOPLASM
When  we  look  at  the  temporary  mounts  of
onion peel as well as human cheek cells, we
can see a large region of each cell enclosed
by the cell membrane. This region takes up
very  little  stain.  It  is  called  the  cytoplasm.
The cytoplasm is the fluid content inside the
plasma  membrane.  It  also  contains  many
specialised  cell  organelles.  Each  of  these
organelles performs a specific function for the
cell.
Cell organelles are enclosed by
membranes.  In  prokaryotes,  beside  the
absence  of  a  defined  nuclear  region,  the
membrane-bound  cell  organelles  are  also
absent.  On  the  other  hand,  the  eukaryotic
cells  have  nuclear  membrane  as  well  as
membrane-enclosed organelles.
The  significance  of  membranes  can  be
illustrated  with  the  example  of  viruses.
Viruses lack any membranes and hence do
not show characteristics of life until they enter
a  living  body  and  use  its  cell  machinery  to
multiply.Rationalised 2023-24
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 55
uestion
1. Fill in the gaps in the following
table  illustrating  differences
between prokaryotic and
eukaryotic cells.
Prokaryotic Cell Eukaryotic Cell
1. Size : generally 1. Size: generally
small ( 1-10 μm) large ( 5-100 μm)
1 μm = 10–6 m
2. Nuclear region: 2. Nuclear region:
_______________ well defined  and
_______________ surrounded by a
and known as__ nuclear membrane
3. Chromosome: 3. More than one
single chromosome
4. Membrane-bound 4. _______________
cell organelles _______________
absent _______________
5.2.5 CELL ORGANELLES
Every cell has a membrane around it to keep
its own contents separate from the external
environment.  Large  and  complex  cells,
including cells from multicellular organisms,
need  a  lot  of  chemical  activities  to  support
their complicated structure and function. To
keep  these  activities  of  different  kinds
separate  from  each  other,  these  cells  use
membrane-bound  little  structures  (or
‘organelles’) within themselves. This is one of
the  features  of  the  eukaryotic  cells  that
distinguish them from prokaryotic cells. Some
of  these  organelles  are  visible  only  with  an
electron microscope.
We  have  talked  about  the  nucleus  in  a
previous section. Some important examples
of cell organelles which we will discuss now
are: endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus,
lysosomes, mitochondria and plastids. They
are important because they carry out some
very crucial functions in cells.
5.2.5 (i) ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM (ER)
The  endoplasmic  reticulum  (ER)  is  a  large
network  of  membrane-bound  tubes  and
sheets. It looks like long tubules or round or
oblong bags (vesicles). The ER membrane is
similar in structure to the plasma membrane.
There are two types of ER– rough endoplasmic
reticulum  (RER)  and  smooth  endoplasmic
reticulum  (SER).  RER  looks  rough  under  a
microscope  because  it  has  particles  called
ribosomes  attached  to  its  surface.  The
ribosomes,  which  are  present  in  all  active
cells,  are  the  sites  of  protein  manufacture.
The manufactured proteins are then sent to
various places in the cell depending on need,
using  the  ER.  The  SER  helps  in  the
manufacture  of  fat  molecules,  or  lipids,
important  for  cell  function.  Some  of  these
proteins and lipids help in building the cell
membrane.  This  process  is  known  as
membrane  biogenesis.  Some  other  proteins
and  lipids  function  as  enzymes  and
hormones. Although the ER varies greatly in
appearance in different cells, it always forms a
network system.
Q
Fig. 5.5: Animal cell
Thus, one function of the ER is to serve as
channels  for  the  transport  of  materials
(especially proteins) between various regions
of  the  cytoplasm  or  between  the  cytoplasm
and the nucleus. The ER also functions as a
cytoplasmic  framework  providing  a  surfaceRationalised 2023-24
SCIENCE56
Camillo Golgi was born at
Corteno near Brescia in
1843. He studied
medicine at the University
of Pavia. After graduating
in 1865, he continued to
work  in  Pavia  at  the
Hospital of St. Matteo. At
that  time  most  of  his
investigations were
concerned with the nervous system, In 1872
he accepted the post of Chief Medical Officer
at the Hospital for the Chronically Sick at
Abbiategrasso.    He  first  started  his
investigations into the nervous system in a
little kitchen of this hospital, which he had
converted into a laboratory. However, the
work of greatest importance, which Golgi
carried out was a revolutionary method of
staining individual nerve and cell structures.
This  method  is  referred  to  as  the  ‘black
reaction’. This method uses a weak solution
of silver nitrate and is particularly valuable
in tracing the processes and most delicate
ramifications of cells.  All through his life,
he  continued  to  work  on  these  lines,
modifying  and  improving  this  technique.
Golgi  received  the  highest  honours  and
awards in recognition of his work. He shared
the  Nobel  prize  in  1906  with  Santiago
Ramony Cajal for their work on the structure
of the nervous system.
5.2.5 (iii) LYSOSOMES
Structurally, lysosomes are membrane-bound
sacs  filled  with  digestive  enzymes.  These
enzymes are made by RER. Lysosomes are a
kind of waste disposal system of the cell. These
help to keep the cell clean by digesting any
foreign  material  as  well  as  worn-out  cell
organelles. Foreign materials entering the cell,
such  as  bacteria  or  food,  as  well  as  old
organelles  end  up  in  the  lysosomes,  which
break  complex  substances  into  simpler
substances.  Lysosomes  are  able  to  do  this
because  they  contain  powerful  digestive
enzymes capable of breaking down all organic
material. During the disturbance in cellular
metabolism,  for example, when the cell gets
Fig. 5.6: Plant cell
for some of the biochemical activities of the
cell. In the liver cells of the group of animals
called vertebrates (see Chapter 7), SER plays
a  crucial  role  in  detoxifying  many  poisons
and drugs.
5.2.5 (ii) GOLGI APPARATUS
The  Golgi  apparatus,  first  described  by
Camillo  Golgi,  consists  of  a  system  of
membrane-bound  vesicles  (flattened  sacs)
arranged approximately parallel to each other
in stacks called cisterns. These membranes
often have connections with the membranes
of ER and therefore constitute another portion
of a complex cellular membrane system.
The material synthesised near the ER is
packaged and dispatched to various targets
inside and outside the cell through the Golgi
apparatus. Its functions include the storage,
modification  and  packaging  of  products  in
vesicles. In some cases, complex sugars may
be  made  from  simple  sugars  in  the  Golgi
apparatus.  The  Golgi  apparatus  is  also
involved  in  the  formation  of  lysosomes  [see
5.2.5 (iii)].Rationalised 2023-24
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 57
damaged,  lysosomes  may  burst  and  the
enzymes  digest  their  own  cell.  Therefore,
lysosomes are also known as the ‘suicide bags’
of a cell.
5.2.5 (iv) MITOCHONDRIA
Mitochondria are known as the powerhouses
of the cell. Mitochondria have two membrane
coverings.  The  outer  membrane  is  porous
while the inner membrane is deeply folded.
These  folds  increase  surface  area  for  ATP-
generating  chemical  reactions.  The  energy
required for various chemical activities needed
for life is released by mitochondria in the form
of  ATP  (Adenosine  triphopshate)  molecules.
ATP is known as the energy currency of the
cell. The body uses energy stored in ATP for
making  new  chemical  compounds  and  for
mechanical work.
Mitochondria are strange organelles in the
sense  that  they  have  their  own  DNA  and
ribosomes. Therefore, mitochondria are able
to make some of their own proteins.
5.2.5 (V) PLASTIDS
Plastids are present only in plant cells. There
are  two  types  of  plastids  –  chromoplasts
(coloured plastids) and leucoplasts (white or
colourless plastids). Chromoplasts containing
the  pigment  chlorophyll  are  known  as
chloroplasts. Chloroplasts are important for
photosynthesis in plants. Chloroplasts also
contain various yellow or orange pigments in
addition  to  chlorophyll.  Leucoplasts  are
primarily organelles in which materials such
as starch, oils and protein granules are stored.
The internal organisation of the Chloroplast
consists  of  numerous  membrane  layers
embedded in a material called the stroma. These
are  similar  to  mitochondria  in  external
structure. Like the mitochondria, plastids also
have their own DNA and ribosomes.
5.2.5 (vi) VACUOLES
Vacuoles are storage sacs for solid or liquid
contents. Vacuoles are small sized in animal
cells while plant cells have very large vacuoles.
The central vacuole of some plant cells may
occupy 50-90% of the cell volume.
In plant cells vacuoles are full of cell sap
and provide turgidity and rigidity to the cell.
Many substances of importance in the life of
the plant cell are stored in vacuoles. These
include amino acids, sugars, various organic
acids  and  some  proteins.  In  single-celled
organisms  like  Amoeba,  the  food  vacuole
contains the food items that the Amoeba has
consumed.  In  some  unicellular  organisms,
specialised vacuoles also play important roles
in  expelling  excess  water  and  some  wastes
from the cell.
uestions
1. Can you name the two organelles
we  have  studied  that  contain
their own genetic material?
2. If  the  organisation  of  a  cell  is
destroyed due to some physical
or chemical influence, what will
happen?
3. Why  are  lysosomes  known  as
suicide bags?
4. Where are proteins synthesised
inside the cell?
Each cell thus acquires its structure and
ability to function because of the organisation
of  its  membrane  and  organelles  in  specific
ways.  The  cell  thus  has  a  basic  structural
organisation. This helps the cells to perform
functions like respiration, obtaining nutrition,
and  clearing  of  waste  material,  or  forming
new proteins.
Thus, the cell is the fundamental structural
unit of living organisms. It is also the basic
functional unit of life.
Cell Division
New cells are formed in organisms in order to
grow, to replace old, dead and injured cells,
and to form gametes required for
reproduction. The process by which new cells
are made is called cell division. There are two
main  types  of  cell  division:  mitosis
and meiosis.
The process of cell division by which most
of the cells divide for growth is called mitosis.
In this process, each cell called mother cell
QRationalised 2023-24
SCIENCE58
What
you have
learnt• The  fundamental  organisational  unit  of  life  is  the  cell.
• Cells are enclosed by a plasma membrane composed of lipids
and  proteins.
• The  cell  membrane  is  an  active  part  of  the  cell.  It  regulates
the  movement  of  materials  between  the  ordered  interior  of
the  cell  and  the  outer  environment.
• In  plant  cells,  a  cell  wall  composed  mainly  of  cellulose  is
located  outside  the  cell  membrane.
• The  presence  of  the  cell  wall  enables  the  cells  of  plants,
fungi  and  bacteria  to  exist  in  hypotonic  media  without
bursting.
• The  nucleus  in  eukaryotes  is  separated  from  the  cytoplasm
by double-layered membrane and it directs the life processes
of  the  cell.
• The  ER  functions  both  as  a  passageway  for  intracellular
transport  and  as  a  manufacturing  surface.
• The  Golgi  apparatus  consists  of  stacks  of  membrane-bound
vesicles  that  function  in  the  storage,  modification  and
packaging  of  substances  manufactured  in  the  cell.
• Most  plant  cells  have  large  membranous  organelles  called
plastids,  which  are  of  two  types—chromoplasts  and
leucoplasts.
Fig. 5.7: Mitosis Fig. 5.8: Meiosis
divides to form two identical daughter cells
(Fig. 5.7). The daughter cells have the same
number of chromosomes as mother cell. It
helps  in  growth  and  repair  of  tissues
in organisms.
Specific cells of reproductive organs or tissues
in animals and plants divide to form gametes,
which  after  fertilisation  give  rise  to  offspring.
They  divide  by  a  different  process  called
meiosis  which  involves  two  consecutive
divisions.  When  a  cell  divides  by  meiosis  it
produces four new cells instead of just two (Fig.
5.8). The new cells only have half the number
of chromosomes than that of the mother cells.
Can  you  think  as  to  why  the  chromosome
number has reduced to half in daughter cells?Rationalised 2023-24
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 59
• Chromoplasts that contain chlorophyll are called chloroplasts
and  they  perform  photosynthesis.
• The  primary  function  of  leucoplasts  is  storage.
• Most  mature  plant  cells  have  a  large  central  vacuole  that
helps  to  maintain  the  turgidity  of  the  cell  and  stores
important  substances  including  wastes.
• Prokaryotic cells have no membrane-bound organelles, their
chromosomes  are  composed  of  only  nucleic  acid,  and  they
have  only  very  small  ribosomes  as  organelles.
• Cells  in  organisms  divide  for  growth  of  body,  for  repalcing
dead  cells,  and  for  forming  gametes  for  reproduction.
Exercises
1. Make  a  comparison  and  write  down  ways  in  which  plant
cells  are  different  from  animal  cells.
2. How  is  a  prokaryotic  cell  different  from  a  eukaryotic  cell?
3. What  would  happen  if  the  plasma  membrane  ruptures  or
breaks  down?
4. What would happen to the life of a cell if there was no Golgi
apparatus?
5. Which organelle is known as the powerhouse of the cell? Why?
6. Where  do  the  lipids  and  proteins  constituting  the  cell
membrane  get  synthesised?
7. How does an Amoeba obtain its food?
8. What  is  osmosis?
9. Carry  out  the  following  osmosis  experiment:
Take four peeled potato halves and scoos each one out to
make  potato  cups.  One  of  these  potato  cups  should  be
made from a boiled potato. Put each potato cup in a trough
containing  water.  Now,
•
(a) Keep cup A empty
(b) Put one teaspoon sugar in cup B
(c) Put one teaspoon salt in cup C
(d) Put one teaspoon sugar in the boiled potato cup D.
Keep  these  for  two  hours.  Then  observe  the  four  potato
cups  and  answer  the  following:
(i) Explain why water gathers in the hollowed portion of
B and C.
(ii) Why  is  potato  A  necessary  for  this  experiment?
(iii) Explain  why  water  does  not  gather  in  the  hollowed
out portions of A and D.
10. Which  type  of  cell  division  is  required  for  growth  and  repair
of body and which type is involved in formation of gametes?